README.md, before:

# DIY reflow oven

Inspired in [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=asZ1zhef8Ss) (see also the [blog post](https://www.digikey.com/en/maker/projects/how-to-build-a-solder-reflow-oven/6c52df4782084f8d97c62d1349df058f)) but the BOM was too expensive

Bought the following elements instead:

| Qty  | Item                                                         | Image                        | Description                                                  | Link                                          | Pack Price (€) | Pack Size | Unit Price (€) | Subtotal (€) |
| ---- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------- | -------------- | --------- | -------------- | ------------ |
| 1    | [ARCELI MAX6675 module + K-type thermocouple](./BOM/sensor.md) | ![](./BOM/assets/sensor.jpg) | K-type thermocouple module with MAX6675, 0–600 °C range, SPI output | [Amazon](https://www.amazon.es/dp/B07MY36P9Y) | 7.99           | 1         | 7.99           | 7.99         |
| 1    | [SSR-50DA Solid State Relay](./BOM/ssr.md)                   | ![](./BOM/assets/SSR.jpg)    | DC 3–32 V input, AC 24–380 V output, 50A max, for heater control | [Amazon](https://www.amazon.es/dp/B08FX1DDJM) | 9.59           | 1         | 9.59           | 9.59         |
| 1    | [Cecotec Bake&Toast 1090 Oven](./BOM/oven.md)                | ![](./BOM/assets/oven.jpg)   | 10 L tabletop oven, 1000 W, 60 min timer, up to 230 °C       | [Amazon](https://www.amazon.es/dp/B0BQ13YSVT) | 31.90          | 1         | 31.90          | 31.90        |
| 1    | Raspberry Pico WH                                            |                              |                                                              |                                               |                |           |                |              |
| 1    | SSD1306 OLED                                                 |                              |                                                              |                                               |                |           |                |              |

Also used a Raspberry Pico WH and a SSD1306 OLED screen I had around

## Step 1 - Measure temp and show it on the OLED

Target: display the temperature on the OLED using a MicroPython script

Inspired in this source video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aUPvASe8D-w

### Flashing MicroPython onto the Pico

I used [Thonny](https://thonny.org/) (a python IDE for beginners with great MicroPython integration). 

1. Install and run:

```bash
$ sudo apt install thonny
$ thonny
```

2. plug the RPi Pico in boot mode: while holding down the **BOOTSEL** button on the RPi Pico, connect the USB cable to your computer, and a new drive will appear: **RPI-RP2**

3. flash MicroPython on the RPi Pico: 
   1. Go to **Tools** > **Options**
   2. In the **Interpreter** tab select **"MicroPython (Raspberry Pi Pico)"** in the dropdown and click **"Install or update MicroPython"**. Thonny will detect the RPi Pico automatically. 
   3. Select variant **"Raspberry Pi Pico W / Pico WH"**. It will download and flash the **MicroPython UF2 file** automatically.
   4. Click **Install** and wait for it to finish![](./assets/install_micropython.png)
   5. After install, the RPi Pico will reboot and connect directly to Thonny — you’ll see the MicroPython REPL (>>>) at the bottom.



### RPi Pico WH pinout

![](./assets/pico-2-pinout.svg)

### Wiring the voltage divider

```
3.3V --- [10kΩ] ---+--- [10K Thermistor] --- GND
                   |
                GPIO26 (ADC 0)
```

### Wiring the SSD1306 OLED to the Pico

| OLED Pin | Connect To Pico | Pico Pin Number | Function |
| -------- | --------------- | --------------- | -------- |
| `VCC`    | 3.3V            | Pin 36          | Power    |
| `GND`    | GND             | Pin 38 or 3     | Ground   |
| `SCK`    | GP1             | Pin 2           | I²C0 SCL |
| `SDA`    | GP0             | Pin 1           | I²C0 SDA |

### Wiring

![](./assets/thermistor_bb.png)

### Pico Firmware

* `main.py` - main function.
* `display.py` - functions to send info to the OLED display  
* `thermistor.py` -  functions to read the sensor

Copy dependencies to the pico:

* `ssd1306.py` - library to communicate with the OLED (copied from https://github.com/stlehmann/micropython-ssd1306)
* `writer.py` - an interpreter for custom fonts for the OLED
* `freesans20.py` - a custom large font for the OLED 

Note: the files from https://github.com/peterhinch/micropython-font-to-py did not work for me, so I copied them instead from the link in the comments of this video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bLXMVTTPFMs

## Step 2  - setup a web server over WiFi to interact from computer or phone

* `wifi.py` : function to connect the RPi Pico to Wifi
* `secrets.py`: contains network information

```bash
SSID = "Network"
PASSWORD = "Password"
```

* `server.py` :  a very basic web server

![](./assets/server_v1.png)

## Step 3 - Control the heater

Next we refactor using [Microdot](https://github.com/miguelgrinberg/microdot) framework and add a few improvements:

* Replace repeated full-page reload every 2 seconds using meta-refresh with polling a tiny JSON file using Java Script. This is more efficient, avoids page flicker and is more extensible 
* Save web page as static files (`index.html` and `style.css`) with a minimalistic, modern design
* Add `/set_target?value=XX` route to update target temperature via HTTP
* Add REST endpoint `/temperature` exposing current and target temp + heater state

* `heater.py` - contains the target temperature logic and functions to control a heater in GPIO22

We copy the library to the pico: `microdot.py`.

![](./assets/server_v2.png)

### Wiring
| ![](./assets/thermistor_v2_bb.png) | ![](./assets/breadboard.jpg) |
| ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |

![](./assets/thermistor_v2_schem.png)

## Step 4 - Temperature Profiles

Next we refactor to add support for temperature profiles and disable manual target temperature setting.

- `profile.py` - classes for multi-phase temperature control with JSON serialization
- `profile_manager.py` functions to manage profile execution, file persistence, and state tracking
- new `profiles/` folder to store temperature profiles as JSON files
  - [low_temp.json](./src/profiles/low_temp.json) profile based on [this datasheet](./assets/low_temp_solder_paste_datasheet.pdf) for Sn42Bi57Ag1 Low Temperature Solder Paste


![](./assets/server_v3.png)

## Step 5 - Plot temperature graphs

![](./assets/server_v4.png)



## Sources

* [Freenove_Ultimate_Starter_Kit_for_Raspberry_Pi](https://github.com/Freenove/Freenove_Ultimate_Starter_Kit_for_Raspberry_Pi) - a kit I use, the repo has tutorials, specs of the components etc 

* [Online Steinhart-Hart model coefficients calculator]( https://www.thinksrs.com/downloads/programs/therm%20calc/ntccalibrator/ntccalculator.html) - needs R measurements at 3 known T points
* [Another video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k9xzGO0SVg0) -  discusses temp curves, has a custom controller PCB

Commit message:

Proof of concept - Add notes and pictures

README.md, after:

# DIY reflow oven

Inspired in [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=asZ1zhef8Ss) (see also the [blog post](https://www.digikey.com/en/maker/projects/how-to-build-a-solder-reflow-oven/6c52df4782084f8d97c62d1349df058f)) but the BOM was too expensive

Bought the following elements instead:

| Qty  | Item                                                         | Image                        | Description                                                  | Link                                          | Pack Price (€) | Pack Size | Unit Price (€) | Subtotal (€) |
| ---- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------- | -------------- | --------- | -------------- | ------------ |
| 1    | [ARCELI MAX6675 module + K-type thermocouple](./BOM/sensor.md) | ![](./BOM/assets/sensor.jpg) | K-type thermocouple module with MAX6675, 0–600 °C range, SPI output | [Amazon](https://www.amazon.es/dp/B07MY36P9Y) | 7.99           | 1         | 7.99           | 7.99         |
| 1    | [SSR-50DA Solid State Relay](./BOM/ssr.md)                   | ![](./BOM/assets/SSR.jpg)    | DC 3–32 V input, AC 24–380 V output, 50A max, for heater control | [Amazon](https://www.amazon.es/dp/B08FX1DDJM) | 9.59           | 1         | 9.59           | 9.59         |
| 1    | [Cecotec Bake&Toast 1090 Oven](./BOM/oven.md)                | ![](./BOM/assets/oven.jpg)   | 10 L tabletop oven, 1000 W, 60 min timer, up to 230 °C       | [Amazon](https://www.amazon.es/dp/B0BQ13YSVT) | 31.90          | 1         | 31.90          | 31.90        |
| 1    | Raspberry Pico WH                                            |                              |                                                              |                                               |                |           |                |              |
| 1    | SSD1306 OLED                                                 |                              |                                                              |                                               |                |           |                |              |

Also used a Raspberry Pico WH and a SSD1306 OLED screen I had around

## Step 1 - Measure temp and show it on the OLED

Target: display the temperature on the OLED using a MicroPython script

Inspired in this source video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aUPvASe8D-w

### Flashing MicroPython onto the Pico

I used [Thonny](https://thonny.org/) (a python IDE for beginners with great MicroPython integration). 

1. Install and run:

```bash
$ sudo apt install thonny
$ thonny
```

2. plug the RPi Pico in boot mode: while holding down the **BOOTSEL** button on the RPi Pico, connect the USB cable to your computer, and a new drive will appear: **RPI-RP2**

3. flash MicroPython on the RPi Pico: 
   1. Go to **Tools** > **Options**
   2. In the **Interpreter** tab select **"MicroPython (Raspberry Pi Pico)"** in the dropdown and click **"Install or update MicroPython"**. Thonny will detect the RPi Pico automatically. 
   3. Select variant **"Raspberry Pi Pico W / Pico WH"**. It will download and flash the **MicroPython UF2 file** automatically.
   4. Click **Install** and wait for it to finish![](./assets/install_micropython.png)
   5. After install, the RPi Pico will reboot and connect directly to Thonny — you’ll see the MicroPython REPL (>>>) at the bottom.



### RPi Pico WH pinout

![](./assets/pico-2-pinout.svg)

### Wiring the voltage divider

```
3.3V --- [10kΩ] ---+--- [10K Thermistor] --- GND
                   |
                GPIO26 (ADC 0)
```

### Wiring the SSD1306 OLED to the Pico

| OLED Pin | Connect To Pico | Pico Pin Number | Function |
| -------- | --------------- | --------------- | -------- |
| `VCC`    | 3.3V            | Pin 36          | Power    |
| `GND`    | GND             | Pin 38 or 3     | Ground   |
| `SCK`    | GP1             | Pin 2           | I²C0 SCL |
| `SDA`    | GP0             | Pin 1           | I²C0 SDA |

### Wiring

![](./assets/thermistor_bb.png)

### Pico Firmware

* `main.py` - main function.
* `display.py` - functions to send info to the OLED display  
* `thermistor.py` -  functions to read the sensor

Copy dependencies to the pico:

* `ssd1306.py` - library to communicate with the OLED (copied from https://github.com/stlehmann/micropython-ssd1306)
* `writer.py` - an interpreter for custom fonts for the OLED
* `freesans20.py` - a custom large font for the OLED 

Note: the files from https://github.com/peterhinch/micropython-font-to-py did not work for me, so I copied them instead from the link in the comments of this video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bLXMVTTPFMs

## Step 2  - setup a web server over WiFi to interact from computer or phone

* `wifi.py` : function to connect the RPi Pico to Wifi
* `secrets.py`: contains network information

```bash
SSID = "Network"
PASSWORD = "Password"
```

* `server.py` :  a very basic web server

![](./assets/server_v1.png)

## Step 3 - Control the heater

Next we refactor using [Microdot](https://github.com/miguelgrinberg/microdot) framework and add a few improvements:

* Replace repeated full-page reload every 2 seconds using meta-refresh with polling a tiny JSON file using Java Script. This is more efficient, avoids page flicker and is more extensible 
* Save web page as static files (`index.html` and `style.css`) with a minimalistic, modern design
* Add `/set_target?value=XX` route to update target temperature via HTTP
* Add REST endpoint `/temperature` exposing current and target temp + heater state

* `heater.py` - contains the target temperature logic and functions to control a heater in GPIO22

We copy the library to the pico: `microdot.py`.

![](./assets/server_v2.png)

### Wiring
| ![](./assets/thermistor_v2_bb.png) | <img src="./assets/breadboard.jpg" style="zoom: 33%;" /> |
| ---------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |

![](./assets/thermistor_v2_schem.png)

## Step 4 - Temperature Profiles

Next we refactor to add support for temperature profiles and disable manual target temperature setting.

- `profile.py` - classes for multi-phase temperature control with JSON serialization
- `profile_manager.py` functions to manage profile execution, file persistence, and state tracking
- new `profiles/` folder to store temperature profiles as JSON files
  - [low_temp.json](./src/profiles/low_temp.json) profile based on [this datasheet](./assets/low_temp_solder_paste_datasheet.pdf) for Sn42Bi57Ag1 Low Temperature Solder Paste


![](./assets/server_v3.png)

## Step 5 - Plot temperature graphs

This is a test with simulated temperature

![](./assets/server_v4.png)

## Step 5 - Optimize architecture

Move state logic to `ProfileManager` class, put some order in the UI, improve set of example profiles etc.

**Bulb Test 55 °C — Proof of Concept**

The graph below shows a temperature profile recorded during a full system test in a simple proof-of-concept setup. An old incandescent bulb served as the heating element, switched by the Raspberry Pi Pico via a solid-state relay. To mimic an oven enclosure, the bulb and temperature sensor were covered with an inverted beer glass, allowing the air temperature to rise quickly to the 55 °C target.

The small ripples in the measured temperature trace reflect the heater control loop cycling the bulb on and off to follow the requested profile. Towards the end of the test, the measured temperature fell behind the target curve because heat dissipation under the glass was not fast enough to achieve the desired cooling rate.

| <img src="./assets/POC_setup.jpeg" style="zoom:25%;" /> | ![](./assets/Bulb_Test_55C.png) |
| ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- |



## Sources

* [Freenove_Ultimate_Starter_Kit_for_Raspberry_Pi](https://github.com/Freenove/Freenove_Ultimate_Starter_Kit_for_Raspberry_Pi) - a kit I use, the repo has tutorials, specs of the components etc 

* [Online Steinhart-Hart model coefficients calculator]( https://www.thinksrs.com/downloads/programs/therm%20calc/ntccalibrator/ntccalculator.html) - needs R measurements at 3 known T points
* [Another video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k9xzGO0SVg0) -  discusses temp curves, has a custom controller PCB
